Are you?
Morning.
Yeah, please. Thank you.
Well, good morning and welcome to the
Social Services Community League Committee.
Uh, thank you for coming in this morning, bright
and new on uh,
what's gonna be the pumps last thing day today.
So good. Pardon? An important, an important topic.
Um, got a briefing from you on population this morning.
We got to 30 minutes, so look, um, in your hands
and take it away.
Alright, well,
uh, I'm Jane Wrightson, the retirement commissioner,
and this is my colleague, Dr. Michelle Reyes,
the policy lead at the commission.
Um, thank you for inviting us
to brief you this morning on the long term outlet
for New Zealand's population.
Um, at this time of year.
I certainly feel I'm aging fast,
and I'm sure you do too. Indeed,
We are for this year.
So let's talk about how it's,
what it's like for all of us, shall we?
Um, you, as you probably know, the role of the commission is
to provide independent, uh, evidence-based advice
to ensure the retirement income system remains fair,
sustainable, and trusted now and in the decades ahead.
Um, and the first message is that we are starting
actually from a strong position.
Our retirement savings system, uh,
which includes New Zealand Super Kiwi Saver
and other private savings, performs well
by international standards.
It provides broad coverage, has relatively low fiscal costs
and benefits from a younger
population than many other countries.
But as you know, the world in the policy
context is changing.
Um, historically,
new Zealand's performed well in reducing poverty
amongst people age 65 and over.
But this is changing. Uh,
financial vulnerability is increasing for over 60 fives.
44% of older New Zealanders feel exposed or poor.
The poverty rate for 65 plus has risen to 16.8%,
which is above the OECD average of 14.2.
Um, we know that housing costs
for the 65 plus are increasing.
Uh, mortgage free ownership, uh, fell from 83%
to 71%,
and 13% are still paying mortgages with 13% renting.
Um, as KiwiSaver continues to grow
in importance within the system,
existing disparities will probably continue to widen, um,
as retirement savings are in increments by factors such
as lifetime earnings and employment type.
Just so you know, men's kiwi saver balances are on average
25% higher than women's, uh,
and only 44% of, uh, the self employee contribute
to Kiwi Saver and they contribute half as much as, uh,
overall as employees.
So I think it's important I point this out
as these truths from our data
differ somewhat from the more common stereotypes
of older New Zealanders
and the supposed great wealth transfer.
In short, the wealth is only transferred to a few
and there are a few more problems emerging.
So what's happening next, which I think is
what this committee is going to be wrestling with.
So we've, we've thought hard about the demographic trends
over the next 50 years.
Um, and as you clearly know, New Zealand, um,
is experiencing a significant demographic shift.
The proportion of people aged over 65
and over is increasing rapidly driven
by longer life expectancies and declining birth rates.
By 2050, the number of people age 65 plus is projected
to increase by about 50%, while the number
of people under 40 will remain
roughly the same as it is today.
This is not a temporary baby boomer effect.
It is a sustained trend due
to sustained changes in birth rates and longevity.
So what are the implications for an aging population
for retirement and social services?
In short, one word, profound NZ super is projected
to remain a significant component of retirement income,
but the fiscal cost will, on a gross basis, rise from 54%,
sorry, 5.4% of GDP today
to 6.6%, uh, by 2050.
It is important to note that this is still
below the OECD average of 10.2%.
So we are still kind of in the middle.
Um, more people will be living longer in retirement
and the diversity of older New Zealand municipal increase
with greater variation in health, housing,
and financial circumstances, uh,
and home ownership amongst older people is declining.
And more people will enter the pension years with mortgages
or as renters, which increases the cost of financial stress
and material hardship.
Also to note, NZ super isn't designed
to cover significant housing costs.
You meant to be mortgage free
or being affordable public housing by that point.
So there are challenges
and opportunities, uh, facing the government of today
and governments of the future.
The system simplicity and universality of strengths,
but not all groups benefit equally, women, Maori Pacific,
peoples renters and the self-employed face greater risk
of hardship in in retirement wealth
and income inequality amongst older people are likely
to widen unless policy settings adapt
and the demand for age appropriate housing,
accessible healthcare and the
and community support will grow.
Um, every three years, a review is carried out
by the retirement commission.
This is your holiday reading.
Um, as required by law, it provides the government
with independent advice on
how retirement policies are performing
and what changes might be needed.
The review of retirement income policies 2025 was published
only last month, and it offers, uh, an opportunity
to take a system-wide view.
It looks across NZ super KiwiSaver
and private savings to understand how different parts
of the system interact.
So this joined up approach helps identify gaps, overlaps,
and opportunities for improvement.
This year's review ta uh,
includes targeted changes we can make now such
as improving KiwiSaver settings
and extending support through parental leave.
It also proposes reforms
to strengthen long term stewardship
and optimize areas for future thinking.
The, the most critical recommendation from the review is
to strengthen long term stewardship
of our retirement system.
We are proposing a 10 year retirement income roadmap guided
by a a, a cross party parliamentary working group,
and a Pan sector stewardship group led
by the retirement commission.
This approach is designed to most important,
build enduring political consensus
and stability across electoral cycles to ensure
that policy is joined up across NZ super KiwiSaver
and private savings and to enable regular monitoring,
public engagement.
Most important and evidence-based adjustment
as our population
and economy change, the worst thing that can happen
is piecemeal announcements
that don't look properly at the long term
and don't consider social impacts equity issues
and the need for long-term planning.
If you want to fiddle with New Zealand super, for instance,
then for heaven's sake, look at how
to make kiwi save better in the longer term,
but the right incentives for the right people.
At the same time. It's a system.
I often frame this as a women's issue as much as anything
because women have fewer retirement savings.
We live longer, and we disproportionately affected
by economic life shocks like divorce or business failure.
This is not just about fiscal issues, it's about the kind
of society we want to live in
and how we want to treat our older people.
So our work at the commission in, in,
in conclusion is guided by belief
that retirement income policies must be evidence-based
and shaped by long-term thinking.
The issues we face are not going away,
and it's crucial that our politicians work together on
enduring solutions.
We have time, this is a chance to pause, to take stock,
and to commit to a practical roadmap to the future, one
that extends beyond political cycles
and focuses on stability, dignity,
and mana in retirement.
So this is really important
because we can ensure that New Zealanders
not only have security in retirement today,
but that future generations, the ones paying
for current pensioners, can also look forward to a system
that is fair, sustainable, and trusted.
Um, I'm grateful that you are digging deep into these issues
because it needs to be done.
Uh, and we are here now to answer questions. Ana,
Uh, thank you very much for that.
Um, uh, very, very interesting, uh,
and a whole lot of issues there.
But I I might just kick off one question.
Um, I've got a whole a lot,
but I'll have to spread around the table. I hope
We can answer them.
Just, um, the, your, your, your points that you made
around, uh, the superannuation scheme not being designed for
significant housing costs on one hand,
and in the other hand you said the 44%
or only 44% of self-employed, um, have KiwiSaver
and of them, half of them, uh, well are only contributing
to half the rate of an employed person on a on average.
I, I understand.
What, what are your, what are your thoughts about
what the potential implications are there?
Because we, we are pretty significant
self-employed cohort in this
Country. That's right. We
do,
we are doing some very deep data digging at the moment.
I've got somebody buried in the bowels of the, um, IDI, the,
the big, the big data lake to try and find out what we know,
because what we know isn't much, uh, we know that ke uh,
that, um, self-employed people are underrepresented at the
KiwiSaver scheme for a, for a variety of reasons.
What we don't know is whether they're providing
for their retirement in other ways,
or whether they're simply relying on selling their business
for retirement, which would be a, you know, the,
the one shot, um, goal, which is always a problem.
Um, so we don't know enough,
but we don't think,
certainly the kiwi safer system is not designed particularly
well for self-employed people.
There's no, no question of that.
So, supplementary on that, are you also looking at, um,
how many of them are using a rental property, you know,
as a, as a, as a retirement, um, bank
Plan? Yeah. Yeah, I think
so. That's,
that's covered on the d isn't it?
That's why this is the stuff that we don't know
what we know, we know quite a lot now about what's happening
in Kiwi Save not enough, but a bit.
But what we don't know is, is how people if, if,
and how people are saving outside
of Kiwi state for retirement.
And that data is very hard to come by,
because oddly enough,
the government does know everything about your fiscal life.
So It's, I've got us up on this.
I just, um, it's, I'm, I'm like, Joseph, I've got
so many questions I'd like to ask you,
and it, your work is so important.
Um, but in terms of these, um, self-employed people,
how much do we know about the levels
of actual income that they have?
Because I mean, I'm really interested in that work
by Elizabeth Golden about greedy jobs versus
the women often are in low paid work
and top up because there needs
to be flexibility in a family,
and it means they're often self-employed,
but I think it masks a lot of self-employed masks,
underemployment, and really low amounts of income.
And so I wanna know, it might just be unrealistic to think
that those people are saving anything.
Like I've known people in
that situation who've saved nothing for years.
They've just treated water.
That's, that's exactly right.
Um, we did a good piece of research with Henry who has, uh,
a little data lake that we were, um, very, um, pleased
to be able to collaborate with them.
And I wonder if you might do
the top line for that, Michelle. I love,
Um, so I think, you know, in terms of that, uh, we see
that in terms of that sole trader, um, database
that they have access to, there are people on lower incomes,
then we would ordinarily see perhaps from wage
and salary earners or more people perhaps on low incomes.
I think the con the factor that's quite, um, difficult
to tease RT is that many are in a
hybrid situation as you described.
Yes. So they might be earning wages
and salaries from, um, some type of employment,
but they're also doing other work on the side.
So, um, in this analysis that we're doing, um,
using the data, um, in the IDI, we can see
that different income streams that people have
and are able to then look at the distribution of,
of income across the different groups.
So we will have more to, to say on
that once we finish that analysis. Mm.
What's been really interesting to me as I've, um,
held disposition is
how good are we know about some of these cohorts?
Yeah. Um, you think there's lots of data out there
and there is kind of, but it's not joined up.
And so commissions like mine, I think one
of our core jobs is
to go digging in a particular cohort, see what we can find out.
Thank you. Subary, Maureen, um, may not even be able
to answer this one either, but, um, do you know
geographically, um, where some of those pressures, uh,
felt more than others?
For older people? Yes.
Um, for the savings that,
that we've just been talking about. So
I don't know whether we've got
two geographical data. Do we?
I don't, we haven't done it in that.
No, we don't. But you can assume that generally speaking,
most of the regions, the, um,
average wage is a little lower than the major centers.
So those things tend to correlate.
But do we have anything specific about that? No. Okay.
Not counting Queenstown possibly,
although then you've got a whole bunch of bank
workers always it out.
The, the median average salary there is
$10,000 lower than the national average.
There's a rule almost. Yeah. Um, you question Helen,
I have to pick, dammit.
I'm gonna ask you about housing
and long-term rental, which I see has got lots of potential
to allow older people to move into a situation
where they release their capital,
but also they're not isolated to the own age group in a, um,
in a village.
A village, even though lots
of people couldn't afford it anyway.
But it means there's, there's multi-generational
communication because they'll be often in a, um,
an apartment, um, block that they share.
Can you tell me, have you had any look at the potential
of long-term rental as a solution to some of these issues?
Uh, not specifically.
Although we have looked at the housing market overall,
and there's a lot of opportunity for
considered government intervention here.
I think, again, these are long term tell
infrastructure issues, right?
Um, and the,
it's a little bit like thinking about
retirement income policy.
The worst that can happen is a whole bunch of stop start,
stop start projects.
The idea that there might be a long term strategy
around housing would be a very good thing,
which would absolutely include different kinds of housing
and different kinds of models.
You've got. Um, I mean,
you've got Sam Stubbs in the private sector doing build
to rent, um, at the moment, which is a great initiative.
You've got the publicly funded, uh, um,
project out in Cannons Creek,
just open this week specifically
for multi-generational Pacific if families,
there's many ways you can do it, but it needs a plan.
Yeah. Any question, Warren?
Um, we booked in your presentation about the roadmap
and cross party collaboration going forward.
Really easy to say. I know, I know. Um, but,
But having said it, maybe, um, you thought about what some
of those policy might be, perhaps
that you, you could share with us.
I think, well, I think the only thing to hold onto
of course is that change is inevitable.
And so if you are doing your job as leaders of this country,
then you presumably want to make sure that change, um, has,
has as little negative impact as possible
and as strong a positive impact as possible.
So if, if this change is coming
because of the demographic changes in this country,
we're just gonna have to be, then
how you look at the retirement system becomes, has
to be become quite strategic.
Again, as I said, if you're going fiddle with the NZ super,
which is a common kind of reflex action, usually is said by,
um, you know, uh, well-paid men put the age up, um,
doesn't, doesn't have any kind of thinking around
what else do you need to do
and what will be the other impacts of that.
For instance, the rise in be, uh, additional benefits.
Mm-hmm. Um, the rise of the, uh, needs, the need
for the unemployment benefit, um, all that stuff,
you know, it's, it's a system.
It has to be thought of that way.
Question Willie, Um, I'm just wondering in terms
of, uh, iwi leaders
and, uh, what's happening with regards to
that broader Maori strategy, how, um,
how you dealing with that?
Is there a, a strategy around that?
'cause they've, they've always been pushing these lines in
terms of, um, you know, relationships with our elders
and the different needs particularly that Maori have.
Um, how, how have you managed that?
Not well, to be fair.
Um, we've kind of run outta runway
and we leaders has been incredibly busy, as you know.
Yeah. But it is absolutely a list of things that need
to be done in terms of the commission, and its,
and its wider engagement
because the issues around older Maori are, are, you know,
completely different to, to others.
Um, and I've not
yet built them into a wider strategy in, in an effective way.
Oh, you've relationships.
So even with, um, Maori NGOs, there's, uh, you're
iwi leaders is one thing,
but a lot of ma number of Maori NGOs too, so
that's gonna be part of the plan coming up.
Yeah. And in the retirement saving space,
there's some room to move here.
I mean, we look at the awa scheme of La Tahu
as a really good model, right.
And there are other iwis developing their own schemes,
which is also great.
Um, if they're all done, um, um, in a,
as they will be in, in a long term strategic way,
there'll be a really useful addition.
Thank You, John. I've got another, another question,
Jane, um, you, I'll, I'll come to you next.
Um, the looking, looking at this, um, your report,
you're saying that cities are more likely in districts
to have lower populations going forwards.
We obviously have a very large land mass in New Zealand.
Uh, we have a relatively low population base,
but a very large land mass.
What do we need to be thinking about in terms of ensuring
that people across regional New Zealand who are likely
to have a higher than average population race?
If I, if I understand your data correctly,
and it comes all sort, all sorts of other additional towns
around transport access to healthcare, et cetera, et cetera,
that's, that's often more challenging in
rural and regional New Zealand.
What, what do we need to be
thinking about there? You think? Well,
Well, this is why these are wicked problems, right?
Because it's all interconnected. Mm-hmm.
So if you are going to have a, um, you know, a,
a mythical happy
and healthy pensioner, they will have sufficient income.
Um, they will have housing security, they will be mobile,
and if they're not mobile, they will
have good health options.
Um, having access to good public transport is, um,
particularly important, uh, in the cities.
It's a fairly difficult problem in the regions,
but those things, again,
are all interconnected as, as you well know.
Um, so I think when you are dealing with, um, it,
when you are thinking with the lens of older New Zealanders,
you have to look at it through a number
of these different, uh, provision lens.
And it's not, it's not as if it's all about
older New Zealanders taking from the system.
You know, we have to also think about
what they contribute to wider New Zealand.
They're taxpayers for a start.
Um, they're a significant part of our voluntary,
of our voluntary workforce.
Um, they're significant.
They have significant
caregiving responsibilities these days.
So it's not like it's a one way street.
Um, and so I think the job of the commission is to, is
to paint a picture that's just somewhat more rounded than,
um, what you often see
In any sort of specific things.
Because I mean, public transport's a classic one.
Public transport isn't gonna happen
in, in rural New Zealand.
Uh, not with current technology.
Like sort of any, any, anything, you know,
specifically anything about rural?
I don't, I don't know. We haven't looked
at that in depth, have we?
Um, but you, you know, it depends if,
if the country's feeling really wealthy at one day you'd be
looking at subsidized taxi services, wouldn't you?
But it's not feeling very wealthy at the moment,
so it's probably not an option.
Um, you might be thinking about community-based initiatives,
um, groundswell stuff.
You know, you might be thinking that, uh,
and this is more local body than national, I think,
but you might be thinking that in a smaller town, um,
there could be, um, a, a, a voluntary
carpool system for older people.
Um, a kind of nonprofit driving Miss
Daisy, if you're like, I'm not sure.
But those kind of solutions
will probably come from the ground up.
I think from the top down would be my theory. Okay.
The communities know its own needs better. Mm-hmm.
That's an important point. Uh, Lawrence, thank
You. I've got, I've got
three questions
because I think just on your comment, one of the things
that I remember one of the Chinese supermarkets in Auckland
did was that they will have a van, they will go around
and pick up all of the seniors in the neighborhood
and make them do a group shop,
and there's a 10% discount if you're over the age.
That's a very canny supermarket operator.
Ah, I know. I thought that was a great idea.
But you are absolutely right in terms
of the communities knows best.
Yeah. I've got two related questions.
They're kind of looking at the opposite end.
On one hand, when you're looking at income,
are you also looking at family trust
and income gained through family trusts?
Um, we are seeing, we are looking,
we were talking about that yesterday.
We weren't, we? Yeah. What do we know? Not much. Yeah.
So again, I mean, it's, it's,
it's an ongoing project at the moment to understand this.
We know that, um, there,
there will be income flows from those trusts.
We also know that, um, when we look at the asset base
of people we need to take into account those trusts as well.
Um, but yeah, it's, it's part of our ongoing work.
And on the other end, you talk about currently the 13%,
and I think previously reported
that we'll be looking at 40% renters by 2048.
What about homelessness?
Do you know, have any data on homelessness?
Um, we would only be looking at
older New Zealanders for a start.
Not just homeless per se.
No, no, no. I see homelessness with 65 plus.
Yeah. I don't know, but I can't imagine it's,
it's not rising, like homelessness in general is rising.
And final question, uh,
everything you've mentioned is very much on the,
from a basic needs perspective, housing,
health, transport, et cetera.
But we all know that enjoyment
of life doesn't also stop at 65.
Mm-hmm. Are you also looking at other things like what
activities or opportunities for continued learning
or et cetera that's available for people over that age
of 65 as well?
Yeah, I think that's more covered by the office
for seniors, better later life strategy.
Um, I look at it in kind
of the good old fashioned Maslow's hierarchy
of needs perspective.
And you would, I would like to have thought that
by the time you hit 65, you'd be heading out the top Yeah.
To those, um, enjoyment of life and wellbeing pieces.
But we are not, which is why we are
so interested in housing transport in particular,
because these are basic things Yeah.
That are currently, uh, under threat
and will continue to be, uh, under threat in the future
as far as we can see, unless there's a good systemic
policy program in place.
Thank you. Um, referring to your idea
of the Maslow's, um, hierarchy of needs,
would there be a use for, uh, greater education initiative
to get more people understanding Maslow's hierarchy of needs
and, and understanding that KiwiSaver is something
that no matter what they should really put aside?
I think it's, um, I think a lot
of people will, will relegate
that to when they're older
or when they're, when they have more money, um,
maybe an education drive
that helps people understand the value of it
at an earlier age.
Because, um, it, it's hard,
and I know, I know people
who have surplus money from when they're younger
and people who don't,
but the decision is still a decision
that all people can make,
but the education part of it, so that they want to
That's exactly right.
Um, the government, uh,
this year announced compulsory financial education in
schools, which is a major breakthrough.
We've been working really at the commission,
having been working really closely with the Ministry
of Education, um,
and the current, uh, fin need in schools providers.
There is financial education taught in schools.
It's just really haphazard.
Um, so we, we've developed a model
that can be delivered into schools next year,
just not quite ready to sign off, but nearly there.
Um, it'll be taught through the maths
and the social sciences curriculum,
which means it gets a hundred percent coverage
across schools in Kura.
Um, and that is a major step forward.
Uh, the next thing, of course, is, is the ongoing, um,
marketing and conversation around KiwiSaver
as a bedrock part of the system.
Um, so it becomes really important at key milestones.
You know, the day you get your first pay package,
if you can put aside 10%, you should,
if you're paying off a student loan
and you're living in New Zealand, put it in your Kiwi Saver
and worry about your student loan a little bit later on.
You know, in small, in small chunks.
There's lots of ways you can do it,
but the, the, we need employers to help with this.
Our own sorted website has a lot of information around this.
Um, and, and we are, uh, marketing on an ongoing basis,
um, for how to increase your own financial literacy.
You know, uh, it's, uh, it's, it's a lifelong journey
for most, and you get people, it's a, it's, a lot of this is
around behavioral economics.
You get people at the time
that they're seeking the information,
you can't exactly push it onto them.
So it's, you know, it is carefully done,
but the schools, the school's process is,
is brilliant. And Michelle,
If I can just add to that, I think, um,
what's been remarkable about Kiwi Save is how it has worked
so well in terms of engaging people through, you know, the,
the use of defaults and als.
I mean, we have, for young New Zealanders, almost 97, 90 8%
of the population is at,
or, you know, they're in KiwiSaver, they're members.
And when you look at wage and salary earners,
about 90% are actively contributing.
So it's been a remarkably successful scheme for, you know,
specific segments of the population,
in particular wage and salary earners.
So I think that those, you know, that's,
that's the good news of the system.
It's worked really well. Um,
and there are a lot of people who are engaged in KiwiSaver.
Yeah. But we're also seeing, um, for example,
people are withdrawing from KiwiSaver more
and more due to financial hardship.
We're seeing an increase of 56.6% this year,
I think reported in July of, you know, people withdrawing.
I guess the question there is
everything you've said is on the basis
of there is a concern,
but it's on the basis of steady as we go.
What happens in the event there is a either a, a manmade,
you know, a human made economic shock or a natural disaster
or something else like a pandemic happening.
Do you do any modeling on what happens during a period
of shock and the long and the impact that will have,
These are what we call life shocks.
Yeah. Um, and they're often a bit more personal than that.
They're about job losses, divorce,
they're about a health crisis.
They're about a divorce, about a business failure, um,
around scams increasingly these days.
So the people's resilience to respond
to life shocks is really important.
Uh, we have a little bit of data on this,
but what we would say is it continues to be part
of the education system that providers, Kiwi safer providers
and banks and the financial sector need to really focus on,
um, that the community mentors
and budget advisors out there who do, who do great work, um,
who are there to help pick up the pieces
and start people again.
Um, but
You want, might I just, um, we, we outta time,
I'll just one last question
and then we have to, um, um, close, close it, uh,
for this point at least is the, the West
as a whole is facing an aging population and challenge.
And I, I see here that, uh, there's 75% chance that
by the mid sixties, sorry, by the mid 2060s, um,
more than half New Zealand population will
be over the age of 45.
What do, what does that mean in the context of,
of New Zealand in the context of sort of global population
aging, um, demographic demography?
I can only really talk about the New Zealand context.
Um, and again, I refer you to, refer you to this report.
This is the changing democracy of this country is,
is staring us in the face.
Um, it's happening around us. We do have time.
We are aging a little more slowly than some of our, um,
other country counterparts,
but this is why we've said very strongly we need a 10 year
plan around this, because there will be fiscal pressures,
but there will also be social pressures and other pressures.
There will be some opportunities here.
Um, and if we think about it strategically, um,
there is an opportunity for this country to,
to work together and figure out what to do.
There will be a little bit of pain here,
but there'll be some adjustments here.
And what we are all looking for, I think is an equitable
and fair system that the country can
afford. That would be the goal.
Well, thank you very much, uh, both of you
for coming in this, um, this morning and,
and Toni, um, fascinat discussion.
Appreciate it. Thank you
So much. Thank you for your
time. Appreciate your time.
Merry Christmas. Happy New Year.
Merry Christmas. Do you have a copy
that Sure, yeah.
You can have that one that isn't
Michelle's notes or sprawled in it.
Thank you so much. You very well. You wanted to email?
I don't think I've got a copy. Yeah, I'd like a copy email.
I don't think I've got one.
Oh, good morning, Paul. Welcome.
Good Morning, Joseph. On mute again.
Yeah, yeah, I know, I know.
It's, it's funny how that still continues to be a thing
for all of us and me included.
Look, uh, welcome. Uh, thank you very much for, uh,
coming on this morning, um, as we head towards the, uh,
the final close of parliament for this year.
But, uh, just to give us a bit of a briefing on, on
what you understand around, uh, demography.
Um, and, uh, look, we, we have 15
or so minutes with you this morning.
Um, what I propose, if you could, um, give us some sort
of opening, um, comments
and what you think is an interesting,
and then maybe if we have time
for some questions from members.
Yes. Um, good morning everybody.
And, um, probably some of you don't, um, are aware
that, uh, I headed up a, a major
research program which ended a couple
of years ago called the Diversity Dividend.
And part of what I'm really interested in is, uh,
demographic transition.
Although I think given the size of what's happening
and how significant it is, it's probably more accurate
to call it a demographic, uh, transformation.
And we, we began to see major demographic change
as we emerge from the global financial crisis 2012.
And that we saw particularly in three things,
the increasing number of people reaching the age of 65, um,
growing immigration as a contribution to our population.
And quite soon afterwards,
a very sharp fall in our fertility.
So the, the key components are a rapid aging,
a fertility decline, which is 25%
below replacement levels now,
and will drop further, um, the increasing concentration
of the population in the top half of the north island.
And of course the impacts of of immigration.
Joseph, I just wouldn't mind focusing on aging for a second
because I think it illustrates
what we, what we're talking about.
And it follows Jane's, uh, presentation.
We talk about numerical aging.
So if we go back to when I was a boy, uh,
growing up in the 1960s in Hawke's Bay,
we had about 200,000 people over the age of 65.
We've currently got 900,000
and mid-century will hit a peak
of 1.5 million.
So we also talk about structural aging,
which is the proportion of the over 60 fives as a proportion
of the total population.
So again, uh, going back
to my boyhood 1960, it was 8%.
It's currently 18%,
and mid-century 25% of all
of us will be aged over 65.
So you can see the size of the, the transformation,
and we're gonna hit tipping points quite soon.
So we talk about an old dominant population when the over 60
fives, uh, 20%
or more of the population that will occur 18% at the moment,
that will occur within the next decade.
Uh, but we also talk about hyper aging, which is where 30%
or more of a community
or a country are aged over 65, we won't get there.
Jane is absolutely right.
We're we are, we are gonna be slower to reach
that hyper aging number, uh, compared
to some other countries.
But we've already got significant parts
of the country which are hyper age.
So the TMS coreman is already 34% aged over 65.
Um, why does it matter?
Well, we talk about entry and exit ratios,
and the larger large baby boom population,
which will exit the workforce over the coming decades,
is not going to be replaced by the entry, um, numbers
because of lower fertility.
So we, we've got an imbalance
and we should anticipate worker shortages.
We've got what's called the age dependency ratio,
which is the number in to those in receipt of, um,
superannuation, which will go from six to one when I was,
um, again, 1960.
Uh, currently it's four to one
and we'll end up at being two to one.
So the implications
for public expenditure are quite significant.
I would draw your attention to a couple
of excellent OCD reports this year, um, where
they point out that a growing proportion
of public expenditure will be, will be, need to be allocated
to an aging population, not only superannuation, uh,
but also healthcare.
And, um, we, we are certainly seeing
that growth in the care economy as it's called,
growing significantly.
So just if I can end on this,
I've just returned from Canada, Canada, um,
they had a closed shop session in Ottawa.
They've got a group of external experts on demography
advising them, uh, Canada, um,
last year had more deaths than birth.
We will hit that tipping point
probably in the 2030s when we've got more deaths than birth.
And so immigration becomes the, the key
factor in deciding whether
or not we grow a population or stay.
And that, and that's the choice
that the Canadians are looking at at the moment.
Do they maintain their population of the current rates
at the current level with some growth, but minimal growth
and therefore, um, these costs of
aging grow, or do they grow the population?
And then really the only way that they can do that
and increasingly us is to, um, look at immigration
to try and balance out this, um, age profile that we've got,
which is, now, if you look at it in 1960, it was a pyramid,
but now it's very much OB shape where the
mid age groups
and the older age groups are now much larger than
the, the younger age groups.
So I think we've got some, uh, some interesting times ahead.
I don't wanna problematize it.
Um, I, I think it's, uh,
it's just a change in our demography.
We've seen these changes before.
Um, and then how do we really accommodate? Thanks, Joseph.
Oh, thanks Paul. I'll, I'll ask two questions
and I'll open up to other members.
Um, this is the first one.
The other countries we are comparing ourselves
to loosely, which ones are those?
Canada and Australia. Okay.
And, and, and the reason for that is that we're a little bit
behind both of them, but our demography is very similar.
And we're three countries that at the moment, um,
see immigration as a positive, not a negative by and large.
Okay, thanks. Um, my other question is, um,
just I've just having talked to you
before, I know there's a, a few spots in the country
where there's a younger population cohort.
Um, yes. Would could you just
tell the committee which ones those are?
Yes. Electorate, not at all.
Um, Hamilton.
Hamilton, there are, there are one
or two exceptions, Auckland's different to the rest
of New Zealand, largely
because it's a recipient of immigration.
And so it has a younger population
and it has a much more diverse population
outside of Auckland.
The two areas
that see have a younger population are
Queenstown Lakes and Hamilton.
Well, there's a shock.
There's not a living question at all.
Oh, really? Lauren, so surprised. Thank you.
Um, it was such an accessible, yeah.
Um, I wanted to check
because the, the, the question
of immigration was a really interesting one that you raised,
but I generally don't know enough about this.
What is the downside of then a re a, a smaller popul,
a reduction in population sites?
Like, 'cause you said Canada is grappling between this,
whether they keep the same or, yeah, yeah.
So, uh, the, the, the downside is that
we essentially change the ratio of people who are available
to work to those people who are
reliant on particularly state support.
Um, um, I've just got to be aware, we've had
to, people are aging differently
and they're aging healthier.
And one of the things I haven't mentioned is that, uh,
we should acknowledge that we are seeing a significant
increase in, um, uh, life expectancy.
So we're adding about two years of life expectancy
to, to every decade.
And it will, it will plateau, but,
but the, the care economy, um, really requires people
to work in elder care and healthcare.
Uh, and, and the question is
where we get those workers from.
So when we change the, the profile of our population, um,
the key question is really how do we generate income,
particularly personal income tax,
and then how do we spend it
and the ratio of people in the workforce
to others who are not.
Good question, Maureen. Um, thank you, Paul.
It's a fascinating topic.
Um, so we, we know we've got this big, um, bubble of
aging people in New Zealand,
but we've also got less, um, kids being born here.
Yes. So we've got this wave coming through that we,
we are gonna have to, um, accommodate in, in a whole lot
of ways, but how long, how long is that wave going
to take to, to move through?
It's like a tsunami that's going through,
and then what, you know, we're gonna, you know,
we don't wanna overbuild and all of that stuff either,
but, um, yeah.
So what do you think about the timing of all
of this in the long, very long term?
Yeah. The 2020s will be the transition.
So we seeing some of this play out by the 2030s.
I talk about the new New Zealand,
which is this very different demography.
It will be in place through the 2030s, forties, fifties.
The un anticipates that our peak population
before we start to define, will be somewhere around, uh,
2060.
So we've probably got, um,
three decades at least.
So let's, let's start it from now
or 2030 through to about 2060.
Right. So it's not, it's not, it's not if, if you want
to think about something analogous,
think about the baby boomers who were born between 45
and 64, and how they transformed
as a proud baby boomer myself,
trans transformed New Zealand.
So we had that expansion of the education sector.
We had many more workers coming into the workforce in the,
you know, the fifties, sixties, and seventies.
Um, it, it, it was, it was quite transformational
and we just had to change how we did things.
So I think, I think probably 30 years would be a,
would be a, um, a, a a relatively conservative, uh,
estimate in terms of answering your question. Okay.
Thank you very much. I've got a follow up comment. Mm-hmm.
I mean, we had, we've just had Jane in
and she was talking about the opportunity.
That kind of pathway means
that she's talking about cross party work.
It's actually something that we really,
it is about starting now, isn't it?
And making a plan. We've actually got the opportunity.
It's not a catastrophe yet.
No, it's not. No, absolutely not.
And in a way we've managed it, as I said, post the GSC,
so from about 2013.
So for the last decade, we've actually
managed it quite well.
And we're about 30 years behind the most advanced
aging societies, which is Japan and Germany.
I, I don't think we want to go down the Japan route,
which is seeing major depopulation.
Japan will go from being a country of 128 million
to about 80 million.
So it's what we call depopulation,
and you can see the strain on societies.
So we've still got time.
It's just that, you know, I, I, again, I would probably,
knowing Jane, she would've asked for bipartisan,
uh, approach to all of this.
And I would certainly echo that.
I think that we shouldn't be surprised in 10 years, um,
to realize that this demography has altered how we,
how we manage our society.
Um, we've got time.
And I think that's, that's my plea as well.
Um, as I'm sure Jane Ma made mention that, uh, you know,
it's, it's, it's a, it's an interesting topic
and there are certainly political dimensions to it.
Um, but I, um, by
and large, I mean, I think we are all concerned about, um,
what this means for how we manage our community,
our family and, and, and, and our country.
So I've just got a follow up question on that.
We, you are, it's almost like
what you are saying is we are assuming an inevitable decline
in population.
And it seems, from what I've done,
and you can tell me whether I'm completely wrong, that
when you get population decline like this, it's
because people are actively making
a choice not to have children.
'cause it's too expensive. And we, we could
change the trajectory if in fact we worked
on issues like making childcare cheaper,
et cetera, because it would become something that people,
or paid people who had children,
we could change some of those things.
Am I right that we aren't just looking at an
inevitable decline?
We have some work to do to decide if
that's what we want to do?
No, you can tell me I'm completely wrong.
No, no, no, no. I, I think you're right and you're wrong.
I mean, I'm, I'm not going to argue against, um,
appropriate childcare.
However, um, our fertility dropped
below replacement level in a very short period
of about three, four years.
And we're now tracking downwards.
So it is down at 1.55 births,
1.55 births per woman, uh, where we need to be at 2.1.
The two major factors in that are the growing level
of women's education.
So if you look at our professional programs at universities
at the moment, two thirds of them in law,
accountancy healthcare are women.
So women are, are the, the qualifications,
the tertiary qualifications are women
and are significantly higher than men.
And the fact that they've got employment, um, adds
to the decision around three things.
One is whether they have children,
and we think, we think that if they're tertiary qualified,
you are, you are a millennial woman or a generation Z woman
and your tertiary qualified
and have got a, a job in New Zealand, there's a 25
to 30% chance you'll choose not to have children.
So it's, it's partly about the economics,
but it's also about, um, women having
a quite different role and a level
of education in New Zealand.
Um, there's the one and done, which is growing,
and then most children are born to women in their thirties.
So the average age of first birth a mother's age
of first birth is now 31.
And Joseph's heard my, um, comment,
but last year there were a thousand more children born
to women age 40 and over compared to women age 20
and under in New Zealand.
So we we're seeing quite a shift in terms of
decisions being made around fertility
and having children, which are partly economic,
but they're also social and cultural.
And, and if I could just end on this, if,
if you look at countries that are really generous in terms
of pro uh, provision of, um, um, care for parents
and children such as Sweden, um, the Swedish
had a slight blip in the number of, uh, births,
but they're exactly the same as New Zealand.
So, um, uh, it's, it's just there's no country
that solved the population decline that arises from
fertility decline yet.
And I might just, um, ask what probably have
to be the last question on a supplementary on this.
Just, um, what, if anything, have you identified
and what's different about those, those three areas you,
you identified as the, as the, um,
younger than average population in New Zealand
or Queensland Lakes, Hamilton and Auckland?
What's, what's different about them?
Um, they're,
they've got a younger median age.
Uh, they've got populations
that are more likely to have children.
So Maori, Pacifica, I have a different fertility.
I've been talking generally, um, in terms of Queenstown,
you've got a very large temporary population,
migrant population.
It is the, um, the town outside the main centers
that has the most immigrants.
So Joseph, I just think that, and I'll end on this.
I I just think that we really need
to put all the factors together in terms of a,
a population policy, um, aging, fertility decline,
uh, the location of the population and, um, and,
and immigration and,
and really say we, we can change some elements of this.
We can decide that we can do things differently.
Um, but it does require, if you like, a pop understanding
of population and also a population policy.
Um, it's, I think it's exciting,
but uh, you know, I just invite you to,
to think about this very new New Zealand that's emerging.
Oh, well thank, thank you very much for that, Paul.
It's, uh, been a fascinating discussion
and, um, look, wish, wish, um, give,
given us a lot to think about as well.
Wishing you a, a very merry Christmas. Happy New Year.
Thank you very much. Thank you.